This directory contains the PLEXIL schemas and related files.  Look
inside the files for more comments.

All schemas are provided in two formats: XSD and RNC (Compact Relax
NG).  We use two third-party tools, Saxon and trang, and an XSLT
stylesheet to create the RNC schemas.

The Makefile generates .rnc schemas from .xsd.  This process is
described within Makefile.  'make' regenerates the .rnc files.  This
is a tool intended for use by the PLEXIL development team; no user
should expect to need to run it.

Schemas provided here:

- core-plexil.xsd defines the Core PLEXIL language as currently
executed by the Plexil Executive.

- extended-plexil.xsd defines the Extended PLEXIL language, a superset
of Core PLEXIL with additional convenience macros.

- safe-plexil.xsd defines a restricted subset of Core PLEXIL that is
easier to verify using static analysis tools.

- plexil-base.xsd is the common subset of the above three schemas.

- plexil-script.xsd is the schema for the Test Executive simulation script.

- core-plexil-v2.xsd, extended-plexil-v2.xsd, plexil-base-v2.xsd, and
safe-plexil-v2.xsd describe a more compact version of the PLEXIL
language.  The Plexil Executive will be modified at some future date to
parse this Core PLEXIL variant.

The file schemas.xml is used by (e.g.) GNU Emacs's nxml-mode, to
locate schemas for the various XML document types found here.  For
more information, see the following chapter of the PLEXIL manual:

  https://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/plexil/index.php?title=PLEXIL,_XML,_and_Emacs

A variety of XML translators, implemented with XSLT stylesheets, are
provided here:

- XSDtoRNG.xsl translates .xsd schema files into RELAX NG format.
This is an intermediate step in the XSD to Relax NG Compact
translation.

- The epx-translator directory contains a set of stylesheets which
translate Extended Plexil into Core Plexil.  The root stylesheet is
translate-plexil.xsd.  The translator can be run conveniently with the
'eplexil' script found in plexil/scripts (see that directory for more
information), though in normal usage it is run automatically when
Standard PLEXIL files are compiled.

- canonicalize-v1.xsl reformats a Core PLEXIL plan into a standardized
format, which facilitates comparisons during translator and compiler
debugging.

- summarize-plexil.xsl generates a concise textual summary of a Core
PLEXIL file.  To use it, run the script file found at
scripts/summarize-plexil .

- plexil-v1-to-v2.xsl translates the current Core PLEXIL XML into
the version 2 form.

- plexil-v2-to-v1.xsl translates Core PLEXIL version 2 XML into the
version 1 form.

The test directory contains a regression test suite for the Extended
Plexil translator.

The validator directory contains schema validation tools for PLEXIL,
used by the test directory and by the Standard PLEXIL compiler
regression test suite.
